How artificial intelligence can boost your productivity level?
From the stone age to the modern world, from hunting and gathering to cultivating crops, from living in caves to building communities, we have come a long way to become the most evolved creature on the planet. So, what is that one thing which is a guiding force throughout this process? I believe in simple words we can say: to enhance the experience of life, or in other words, to boost our productivity level. Once the basic need of food, cloth, and shelter is taken care of, we want a comfortable life, good education, proper healthcare, and the list goes on. This urgency and endless need pushed us to make breakthrough inventions that made human life more comfortable and productive. First, humans invented electricity, then the computers came, after that portable computing devices like laptops and mobile phones became operative, and now artificial intelligence or AI is a buzzword. Every creation by human beings transformed human life on the face of this planet. From living in the mud house to building skyscrapers, from riding a bullock cart to flying an aircraft, from posting letters to making video calls, and now from computers to AI or Artificial intelligence is yet another groundbreaking invention of humankind, which can revolutionize our lifestyle forever!
#Artificial_Intelligence #productivity #problem_solving #technology #machine #human
So, what is Artificial Intelligence or AI? We can say in simple words that AI is the ability of a computer program to think and learn rationally. It is about pattern recognition, analyzing images and videos and learning, natural language processing, and understanding. It is more about creating a technology that can, in some cases, replace what humans do. However, to me personally, the most crucial part of the definition of AI is the application to solve problems intelligently and rationally using algorithms that enables us to have computers find deep patterns that we may not have even known exist. AI is like a complex series and layers of algorithms that create a neural network that processes data and information coming into the system and derives knowledge from it. AI is a complicated and broad concept, where Machine Learning is a subset of AI, and Deep Learning, a specialized subset of Machine Learning.
According to a study by PWC, $16 trillion of GDP will be added between now and 2030 based on AI. The economic impact of this scale has never been seen before. And it is not just in the IT industry but impacts virtually every industry and aspect of our lives.
So, now the question is how people around us are using this enigmatic technology?
We use AI all the time. But mostly, we are unaware of it. We use AI whenever we type in a search query on a search engine. Every time we use our GPS or whenever we use any voice recognition system. What we can do with artificial intelligence is unlimited. Whenever we do anything on any technology, we are using some form of machine learning or artificial intelligence. AI means different things to different people. AI facilitating machines and humans to understand and interact with each other creating new opportunities and new ways of doing business. For example:
A videogame designer will use AI to jot down the code that affects how bots play and observe their reaction.
A data scientist can use AI to explore and classify data to fulfill specific goals. 
Law enforcement agencies can use AI to identify criminals in video feeds.
Top of Form
Bottom of Form
In the educational sector, AI can provide students with conversational interfaces and on-demand online tutors.
Customer service Chatbots improved customer experience by resolving queries on the spot and freeing up agent time for conversations that add value.
Chatbots powered by natural language processing capabilities are employed in healthcare to interact with patients and run diagnoses like real doctors.
AI-powered advances in speech-to-text technology have made real-time transcription possible.
Self-driving cars, facial recognition in social media apps, and image detection are possible because of AI.
Watson, Alexa, Siri, Cortana, and Google Assistant are also a gift of AI.
In Medicine, AI is helping doctors arrive at more accurate preliminary diagnoses, reading medical imaging, finding appropriate clinical trials for patients. It is not just influencing patient outcomes but also making operational processes less expensive. It is helping patients with Lou Gehrig’s disease, for example, regain their original voice in place of using a computerized voice.
AI is impacting the quality of our lives daily. There’s AI in our Netflix queue, our navigation apps, keeping spam out of our inboxes, and reminding us of important events. AI monitor our investments, detecting fraudulent transactions, identifying credit card fraud, and preventing financial crimes. AI has the potential to access enormous amounts of information, imitate humans, even specific humans, make life-changing recommendations about health and finances, correlate data that may invade privacy, and much more.
So, what we have understood is AI has penetrated our day-to-day life. Now the question is how people can use it in the best possible way to extract value from it and boost their productivity even further? Here are some of my suggestions:
Empowering People with Disabilities: More than one billion people around the globe live with any form of disability, which accounts for around 15% of the population. AI or Robot if used correctly, can turn out to be a blessing for these people. AI can provide preliminary support to make their life a little easier and efficient. For example, the world renounced scientist Stephen Hawkins lived most of his life with the assistance of AI and other technology. Likewise, for the paralyzed people AI or a robot can help to do basic day-to-day activities. For a blind person, AI can work as a personal assistant who can provide text-to-speech translation, writing assistance, and support in other regular activities. Whether a person is blind, deaf, or paralyzed, it doesn’t matter. AI can be a life-changing tool for them.
Boosting the quality of self-study: AI can transform our educational system completely. Just imagine how it would have been if there weren’t any means of doing online education in this pandemic and lockdown? Our entire education would have come to a halt. I believe post-pandemic, the world may shift more to an online medium, both for work and education. Other than that, we sometimes face difficulties in self-study. Their artificial intelligence can help by understanding, explaining, and providing the correct information at the right time. Just imagine how efficient a student’s life would have been if they had a robot as a tutor 24*7!
Women Safety: AI can be of enormous help in providing safety, protection, and security services.
Personal Assistant: It would have been so convenient for us if we had a Personal Assistant. People like us can’t afford to keep a personal assistant for them to have a robot who can keep an account of our daily work would have been so convenient and productive.
Helping Hand in the Household Chores: Household chores is an essential factor that impacts our daily life. It will be a blessing for every household to have a robot to do the basics chores of cleaning, cooking, washing, carrying heavy loads, and doing other repetitive jobs. It will save a lot of time, and we can invest that time in more productive and creative activities.