INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 4.0 – PROS AND CONS
Before jumping to the pros and cons of industrial revolution 4.0, it is important to understand industrial revolution 4.0. Industrial Revolution 4.0: Industrial revolution 4.0 is the term that is used to describe the transition from an electronic-based industry to the one that is dominated by the fusion of new and emerging fields and ideas like Artificial Intelligence, robotics, and green energy, etc.
 ‘Industry 4.0’, is the era of digitalization. The term originated from Hanover Messe 2011 and was incorporated in German high-tech strategy. Much is attributed to Klaus Schwab, a German engineer who founded the World Economic Forum. Two years later, the Industry 4.0 Platform (central network for digital transformation) was set up to make it work. It is characterized by 4 physical and digital trends: 1 Autonomous motor vehicles (cars, trucks, drones, aircraft, water vessels); 2 3D printing (medical implants); 3 Advanced robotics (Agri to health care); 4 New materials (graphene).
It helps relieve poverty and improve people standard of living
With artificial intelligence and fast-paced internet like 5G, there will be better diagnosis, cheaper and better medical services.
The emergency of new and innovative technologies helps better undertake better security, surveillance and search and rescue operations.
India has currently announced a new drone policy that allows for efficient security, traffic, and mapping.
It will help connect every last village in the country to ensure better government services and improved infrastructure for all.
Artificial intelligence will play a significant role in changing the lives of specially-abled able.
It promotes ease of doing business and ease of living.
The improved early warning systems weather forecasting systems etc. and assure improved disaster management reduce of causality, faster evacuations.
 The improvement in fields of biotechnology, AI, pest control mechanism, innovative irrigation system, etc. allows for increased crop production. 
 